We use energy resources forelectricity,heating, andtransport.Currently, we primarily usenon-renewable energy resources. These are resources thatcannot be replenishedas they are used.Non-renewable energy resources includefossil fuels, such as coal, oil, and natural gas, andnuclear fuels, such as uranium and plutonium.These fuels will allrun outif we keep using them.The UK, like many other countries, is trying to use morerenewable energy resources.Renewable energy resources includewind,solar,hydroelectric,waves,tidal,geothermal, andbiofuel.Renewable energy resources will not run out, so they aresustainable– we will be able to use them long into the future.After electricity has been generated, it isdistributedto homes and businesses across the country using thenational grid.The national grid is anetwork of cables and transformersthat connects power stations to consumers.Fossil fuels includecoal,oil, andnatural gas.They are formed fromorganic matter(dead plants and animals) that has been crushed overmillions of years. They are considerednon-renewable. because they take so long to be made.Fossil fuels can be burnt in power stations to generateelectricity.They can also be burnt in our homes to provideheating and hot water.Oil can be refined into petrol and diesel to be used tofuel vehiclessuch as cars, trains, and planes.Burning fossil fuels releasescarbon dioxide, which contributes toclimate change.Burning fossil fuels also releasessulfur dioxide, which causesacid rain.Nuclear fuelcan be used to generate electricitywithout releasing carbon dioxide.Nuclear energy ischeaper and more efficientthan fossil fuels.However, the disadvantage of nuclear energy is that it producesradioactive waste.This radioactive waste can causecancer, andstays dangerous for a long time. We still haven’t found a good way to store this waste.
Renewable energy resources includewind,solar, hydroelectric,waves,tidal,geothermal, andbiofuel.Renewable energy infrastructure is usuallyexpensive to set up, but has verylow running costs, because you do not need to pay for any fuel.Additionally, most renewable energy resourcesdo not release carbon dioxidewhen generating electricity, so they only contribute to climate change when being built.Biofuel is an exception to this.Biofuelrefers to fuel made from living organisms (such as wood or vegetable oil) or their waste (such as methane from cows).Burning biofuelsdoes release carbon dioxide, but, as the plants it's made of absorbed carbon dioxide while they grew, the environmental impact is considered less than when burning fossil fuels.Wind turbines and solar panelscan produce a lot of electricity cheaply, but they are unreliable, because they depend on weather conditions and require a lot of land.They also require a lot of space, they are hazardous to birds, and some people think that the wind turbines cause visual and noise pollution.Wave and tidal energyuse the motion of water to generate electricity, but this can disrupt wildlife.Geothermal energyuses energy from the Earth’s core to generate electricity.Geothermal power stations can only be built in certain areas (usually where there are volcanoes nearby).Hydroelectric power plantsuse the flow of water from a high-level reservoir to a low-level reservoir. The flowing water generates electricity.Hydroelectric power works alongside other methods of generating electricity to meet supply when demand is high.Water from behind thedam(label 1) flows down to thegenerator(label 2) where it's kinetic energy is transferred to electrical energy.
A simple machine changes the size or direction of an applied force.When a force moves an object through a distance,work is done.Work done is equal to the energy transferred.work done = energy transferredLevers,gears, andpulleysare examples of simple machines.There are lots of everyday uses of simple machines:•Handles on nail clippers•Pulling nails out of a wall using a hammer•The handle on a tin opener•Gears on a bicycle, which allow the cyclist to travel uphill more easily•Lifting a heavy load with a wheelbarrow
The work done by the person using the level and the work done on the weight must be equal, because energy is always conserved.work done = force × distanceAs the applied force is smaller than the weight of the object, the distance the person pushes must be greater than the distance moved by the weight.Therefore, the distance from the person to the pivot must be greater than the distance from the pivot to the object.This allows asmaller forceto be used over alonger distanceto move a heavy object.The longer the lever, the greater theturning effect.
Gears have adrivergear and adrivengear.The teeth on the driver and driven gears interlock, so when one is turned, it causes the other to turn.The driver gear is the one that is turned. This causes the driven gear to turn.Example 1: The driver gear is smaller than the driven gear.When the driver gear is rotated once, the driven gear does not complete a full rotation.Therefore, the driven gear rotates more slowly than the driver gear.If the driven gear has double the number of teeth than the driver gear, then the driven gear will rotate with half the speed of the driver gear.The turning effect on the driven gear is double the turning effect of the driver gear.This type of gear system is used when a large output force is required but moving at a slower speed is acceptable.Example 2: The driver gear is larger than the driven gear.When the driver gear is rotated once, the driven gear completes more than one full rotation.Therefore, the driven gear rotates more quickly than the driver gear.If the driven gear has half the number of teeth than the driver gear, then the driven gear will rotate with double the speed of the driver gear.The turning effect on the driven gear is half the turning effect of the driver gear.This type of gear system is used when a high speed is required but a lower output force is acceptable.
A pulley enables the direction of a force to be changed.The person applies a force downwards and the object moves upwards.Multiple pulleys can also allow thesizeof the force to be changed.When using multiple pulleys, the person will need to pull the rope a greater distance than how far the object needs to move.
  All objects have a store of thermal energy .   An object could be a solid, liquid, or gas.   The thermal energy stored by an object depends on two factors :   • the number of particles the object contains   • the total kinetic energy stored by all the particles in the object (faster particles store more kinetic energy).   When there is a difference in temperature between two objects, energy is transferred .   Energy always transfers from the hotter object to the cooler object .   When cold milk is added to hot tea, the temperature of the cold milk increases and the temperature of the hot tea decreases .   Thermal energy is transferred from the hot tea to the cold milk.   At the same time, thermal energy is transferred to the surroundings.   
  When there is a difference in temperature, energy transfers from the hotter object to the cooler object.   The bigger the difference in temperature between the two objects, the quicker energy transfers between them.   In other words, the rate of energy transfer is higher when the temperature difference is higher.   As the temperature difference decreases, the rate of energy transfer decreases.   The energy transfer stops when the objects reach thermal equilibrium .   Thermal equilibrium is when both objects reach the same temperature.   An everyday example of thermal equilibrium is shown below:   Initially, the hot tea had a temperature of 75 ˚C.   The cold milk had a temperature of 5 ˚C.   The mixture of tea and milk reaches thermal equilibrium at 67 ˚C.   During the time it takes the two objects (the tea and milk mixture) to reach thermal equilibrium, some energy has transferred to the surroundings.   
      All particles in an object have kinetic energy stored , because the particles are moving .   • In a solid, the particles vibrate.   • In a liquid, the particles move past each other.   When an object is heated, the kinetic energy stored by the particles increases, which increases the thermal energy of the object.   The particles move (or vibrate) more quickly.   Energy can be transferred by conduction in solids and liquids, because the particles are close together.   Particles next to each other collide , and transfer kinetic energy from one particle to the other.   When one end of a piece of metal is heated by a flame, thermal energy transfers along the metal by conduction .   Metals are good conductors of thermal energy.   Eventually, the person holding the metal would feel an increase in temperature.   Through conduction, thermal energy can transfer between two objects that are touching.   Energy always transfers from the hotter object to the cooler object.   
          Non-metals are poor conductors of thermal energy.   Materials that are poor conductors of thermal energy are called insulators .   Insulators can be used to reduce dissipation .   Dissipation is the transfer of energy to stores that are less useful.   Materials that are good insulators contain pockets of air.   Air is a gas, so the particles in it are far apart and they do not collide very often.   This means that energy cannot be easily transferred through a gas by conduction.   Therefore, materials with trapped air are bad conductors and cannot transfer thermal energy easily. This means that these materials help to reduce dissipation.   Everyday examples of insulators that are used to reduce thermal dissipation to the surroundings include:   • Loft insulation to keep houses warm and reduce energy costs   • Woolly hats, gloves, and socks to keep people warm   • Insulated flasks to keep liquids hot   Sometimes insulators are used to prevent objects from heating up .   For example, plastic pan handles prevent people from burning their hands when cooking.   
              Infrared radiation is a type of wave that can transfer thermal energy.   Infrared radiation cannot be seen.   All objects emit (give out) and absorb (take in) radiation .   When an object emits and absorbs radiation at the same rate , its temperature stays the same.   When an object absorbs more radiation than it emits, its temperature increases .   When an object emits more radiation than it absorbs, its temperature decreases .   Through radiation, energy can transfer between two objects that are not touching.   
            

all energy stores:
magnetic
internal (thermal)
chemical
kinetic
electrostatic
elastic potential
gravitational potential
nuclear

Temperature itself is NOT an energy store
Temperature is a measure of the particles' average kinetic energy, but is not an energy store.
